Chemotherapy Symptom Monitoring Chatbot Documentation

Overview
This document outlines the structure and functionality of the chemotherapy symptom monitoring chatbot, detailing how each symptom is individually assessed through comprehensive short screening questions, clearly defined alert criteria, and detailed follow-up questions.
If an alert is reached, all long questions are asked, along with a recommendation message to call the provider and an option to view educational content.

Logic
Same day alert = Long questions, recommendation to provider
Moderate for 3 days on symptoms where question asked to patient = Long questions, recommendation to provider

Community Questions
This question will only appear to patients who report symptoms where the questions commonly impact daily functioning (e.g., fatigue, diarrhea, pain, neuropathy, or other disruptive symptoms).
"Are you experiencing difficulty performing daily activities, such as personal care, household tasks, eating, moving around, or managing your medications?"

If yes, "Which of your current symptoms are causing this difficulty?"

Immediate Alert Symptoms
Trouble Breathing & Chest Pain & Significant Bleeding what won't stop with pressure

Immediate Alert Message: "Call 911 or your care team immediately at your discretion."

Assess for dehydration = What color is your urine? Is the amount of urine a lot less over the last 12 hours? Are you very thirsty or lightheaded? Do you know what your heart rate and blood pressure is? If so, please state. ALERT if HR>100 or systolic bp <100

Individual Symptom Monitoring

Fever

Short Questions:
"What is your temperature? If your temperature is greater than 100.4°F, please specify."
"Have you taken fever-reducing medications today?"

If yes, "What medication did you take and how often did you take it?"

Alert Criteria: Fever greater than 100.4°F once or sustained above 100.4°F for more than 1 hour.

Long Questions:
"Are you having any trouble breathing?" (If yes, should prompt for trouble breathing)
Select all that you are currently experiencing: Rapid heartbeat example is your heart rate above 100, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, redness around the port, cough? -- I'm assuming this should prompt for those symptoms if yes*
Do you feel: dizzy, confused, or experience burning on urination (Select all that apply)
How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 24 hours? Select the closest that applies: About the same as usual, less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink
Are you able to perform daily self care like bathing and dressing yourself?

Nausea

Short Questions:
"How many days have you been nauseated? trigger if this symptom has not been logged the day before"
"How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 24 hours?" Select the closest that applies:
About the same as usual, Less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink
Are you taking anti-nausea meds?

If yes, what medication did you take and how often?

"Rate your nausea severity after taking medication (if taken): mild, moderate, or severe."

Alert Criteria (OR)
24 hour intake rated as "Almost nothing" OR "nothing"
Nausea rated as severe despite taking the prescribed anti nausea medications

Long Questions:
"Have you vomited in the last 24 hours?

If so, how many times?"

"Are you experiencing abdominal pain or cramping?"
Any weight loss?
Any fever > 100.4
What color is your urine
Is the amount of urine in the last 12 hours a lot less than your usual amount?
Are you very thirsty?
Are you lightheaded?
Are you able to perform self care activities?

Vomiting

Short Questions:
"How many days have you been vomiting? trigger if not logged the day before"
"How many times have you vomited in the last 24 hours?"
"How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 12 hours?" Select the closest that applies: About the same as usual, Less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink
"Are you taking medication for vomiting as prescribed? Rate your vomiting as mild, moderate, or severe after taking medications."
"If moderate over 3 days, state: You've had this symptom for a few days. Are your medications resulting in the symptom getting worse, staying the same, or improving?"

Alert Criteria (OR)
More than 6 episodes in 24 hours
No oral intake over the last 12 hours
Rating of severe despite taking anti-nausea medications
Moderate over 3 continuous days

Long Questions:
"Do you have abdominal pain or cramping?"
Are you constipated?

How many bowel movements do you have a day?

Do you have diarrhea?

How many bowel movements are you having a day?

Has your vomiting affected your ability to do daily household work?
Are you able to perform daily self care like bathing and dressing yourself?

Diarrhea

Short Questions:
"How many days have you had diarrhea? trigger if not logged the day before"
"How many loose stools have you had in the last 24 hours?"
"Do you have abdominal pain or cramping?"

Rate as mild, moderate or severe

Is your stool: Black, Bloody, Contains mucus, normal, other (select all)

If other, describe your stool

Have you taken anti diarrhea medications as prescribed

What did you take and how often?

"How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 12 hours?" Select the closest that applies: About the same as usual, Less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink
"Rate your diarrhea as mild, moderate, or severe after medications"
"If moderate over 3 days, state: You've had this symptom for a few days. Are your medications resulting in the symptom getting worse, staying the same, or improving?"

Alert Criteria:
More than 5 loose stools per day or moderate/severe rating.
Moderate/Severe abdominal pain or cramping
Black or bloody or mucus in stool or dehydration
Almost nothing or nothing for oral intake
Rating of severe despite taking anti-nausea medications
Moderate over 3 continuous days

Long Questions:
"Are you able to perform daily self-care activities? (ex. Person hygiene, dressing, managing medications)? -- community question
Has the diarrhea affected your ability to do daily activities such as household work, eating, moving around?
Any fever > 100.4
Any nausea? Any vomiting?
What color is urine?
Is urine amount a lot less over the last 12 hours?
Are you very thirsty or lightheaded?

Bleeding/Bruising

Short Questions:
"Are you experiencing bleeding that won't stop after applying pressure?"
"Do you have a lot of blood in your stool or urine?"
"Did you injure yourself?"
Are you on blood thinners (examples are Xarelto, eliquis, coumadin, or plavix)?
Is the bruising in one area of your body or all over?

Alert Criteria:
Bleeding that doesn't stop after applying pressure
Blood in stool or urine

No long questions

Fatigue

Short Questions:
"How many days have you been experiencing fatigue? Trigger if not logged the day before"
"Is your fatigue interfering with daily activities like household chores or work?" (Community Question)
"Rate your fatigue severity: mild, moderate, or severe."
If moderate over 3 days, state: You've had this symptom for a few days. Is your fatigue getting worse, staying the same, or improving?"

Alert Criteria:
Fatigue that significantly interferes with daily activities
Severe fatigue rating
Moderate fatigue lasting 3 or more days

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"How many hours are you sleeping/spending in bed each day due to fatigue?"
"Has the fatigue affected your ability to bathe, dress, or feed yourself without help?
"Do you have fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or lack of appetite?

Eye Complaints

Short Questions:
"Are your eye symptoms new?"
"Are you experiencing pain?"
"Is there discharge or excessive tearing from your eyes?"
Are you experiencing any new problems with your vision?

Select all that apply: blurry vision, double vision, other

Has it interfered with your ability to perform daily tasks like reading, driving, or working on a computer?
Rate your symptoms mild, moderate or severe
If moderate over 3 days, state: You've had this symptom for a few days. Is this symptom (fill in the blank) getting worse, staying the same, or improving?"

Alert Criteria:
Interference with performing daily tasks mentioned in question
Rating of severe or double vision
Moderate over 3 days

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Have you consulted an eye doctor regarding your symptoms?"

Mouth Sores

Short Questions:
"Are you experiencing pain in your mouth?"
"How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 24 hours?" Select the closest that applies: About the same as usual, Less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink
Rate the mouth sores as mild, moderate or severe after taking medications (if taken)?
Do you have a fever?
If moderate over 3 days, state: You've had this symptom for a few days. Is this symptom (fill in the blank) getting worse, staying the same, or improving with medication?

Alert Criteria:
If oral intake over last 24 hours is almost nothing, or nothing
Severe pain despite medication
Moderate over 3 days

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Are your mouth sores causing pain or difficulty swallowing?"
How many days have you not had normal food and/or drink? (if new symptom)
Assess for dehydration

No Appetite

Short Questions:
"Have you experienced weight loss recently (defined by more than 2% of body weight in one week)?

If yes, how much weight have you lost in pounds?"
What is your weight one week ago versus today?

"How much have you been able to eat or drink in the last 2 days?" Select the closest that applies: About the same as usual, Less than half of what I normally eat or drink, Almost nothing --- just a few bites or sips, I haven't eaten or had anything to drink

Alert Criteria:
Significant weight loss (over 3 pounds in a week or 2% in a week -- we will have to build that formula in as Weight Loss % = = [(Baseline -- Current) / Baseline] × 100.)
Intake rated as Almost nothing or nothing
Difficulty swallowing

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Are you experiencing difficulty swallowing?"
Select all that apply: diarrhea, constipation, mouth sores, nausea, vomiting, none of the above
"Assess for dehydration?"
"Are you hungry?"

Constipation

Short Questions:
"How many days has it been since you had a bowel movement,
What is the normal amount for you?
Are you passing gas?

Alert Criteria:
No bowel movement for more than 2 days

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Are you experiencing abdominal pain or vomiting?"
"Have you taken any stool softeners or medications for constipation?

Which ones?

Assess for dehydration

Urinary Problems

Short Questions:
"Has the amount of urine that you have been outputting been drastically reduced?"
Is there an increase in how many times you are urinating?
"Are you experiencing any burning sensation during urination?"

Rate as mild, moderate or severe

"Do you have pelvic pain from urination?"
"Have you noticed any blood in your urine?"

Alert Criteria:
Significant change in urine amount (greatly reduced or increased)
Any pelvic pain
Presence of blood in urine
Moderate or Severe pain or burning during urination

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Is there an odor to the urine?"
"Are you drinking fluids normally?"
"Are you diabetic? If yes, what is your blood sugar running?
"Are you able to perform daily self-care activities like bathing and dressing yourself?" (Community Question)

Skin Rash or Redness

Short Questions:
"Where is the rash located?" Select all that apply: Face, Chest, Arms, Legs, Hands/feet, infusion site, other

If other, where is the site
If the rash is at the infusion site, is there swelling, blistering, redness or an open wound? Also, do you have fevers, chills?
All other sites (not infusion site) where the rash is there --

Does it cover more than 30% of your body?
Has it affected my ability to do daily activities such as household work, eating, moving around? (community question?)
What is your temperature?

Alert Criteria:
If infusion site has swelling, blistering, redness, open wound, fevers or chills,
All other sites -- if activity of daily living affected or temperature > 100.4
Covers more than 30% of body

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
How many days have you had it?

If more than 1, is it getting worse?

Select all that apply: Currently feeling unwell, broken or cracked skin, any liquid coming from the rash or infusion site, Swelling or warm to touch

Pain

Short Questions:
"Where is your pain located? Please select all areas that apply: chest, hands or feet, mouth or throat, muscles or joints, headache, abdomen (stomach), bones or back, IV/port site, other location."

If other location, where?

"Rate your pain severity: mild, moderate, or severe."
Does it interfere with daily activities?
Do you have a fever over 100.4?

Alert Criteria:
If chest pain -- stop and ask to call provider/911
If rated moderate/severe and interferes with daily activities OR if severe at interferes with daily activities
If the fever is over 100.4

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
Any headache, double vision, abdominal pain, vomiting, bloody, black stool?
Is the pain getting worse?
Any numbness of tingling or arms or legs?
Do you have trouble keeping balance or walking?
Did you get neulasta within the last 3 days?
"Is the pain affecting your ability to sleep or rest?"
If pain around IV site or port site?

Is there swelling, blistering, redness or an open wound?
Do you have chills?

Swelling

Short Questions:
"Describe the location of your swelling: Select one of the following: both legs, one leg, other

If other, where is the swelling?

When did the swelling start? -- If new symptom
"Are you experiencing redness, or pain in the swollen area?"
"Rate your symptoms as mild, moderate or severe?"

Alert Criteria:
Swelling located in only one leg
If redness or pain
Moderate or severe symptom rating

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Are you experiencing shortness of breath along with the swelling?"
Do you have a history of blood clots?

Only ask once -- and if no -- then save it and don't ask again

Cough

Short Questions:
"How many days have you had a cough? Trigger if not logged the day before."
What is your temperature?
"Is your cough producing mucus?"

If yes, "What color is the mucus? Clear, yellow, green, or bloody?"

What medications have you used to help with your cough?

Is it helping?

Does the cough prevent you from doing daily activities such as household work, eating, moving around?
"Are you experiencing chest pain or shortness of breath with your cough?"
Do you have the ability to check your oxygen saturation at home?

If so, what is it?

Alert Criteria:
If chest pain or shortness of breath then alert to call 911/care team
If cough prevents daily activities
If temperature > 100.4
Or Oxygen saturation < 92%

No long questions

Neuropathy

Short Questions:
"How long have you had numbness, tingling, or weakness in your hands or feet? Trigger if not logged the day before."
Does the numbness/tingling interfere with normal acitivites?
"Rate your neuropathy severity as mild, moderate, or severe."

Alert Criteria:
Severe neuropathy indication
If numbness/tingling interferes with normal activities
Moderate neuropathy lasting 3 or more consecutive days

Long Questions (triggered by alert):
"Is neuropathy affecting your ability to perform daily tasks such as buttoning your shirt, type, turn pages in a book or magazine, or walk long distances because of the tingling or numbness?
Has the numbness or tingling gotten worse in the past week or started to move higher up your arms or legs?
Have you had trouble feeling the ground when walking, or felt unsteady or off balance?

After summary that goes through symptoms and the patient has the option to add something and they say no.

Then say " Today isn't one of the scheduled days when your symptom summary is automatically sent to your oncology team. It is recommended you call your care team.
After the conversation and no alert-Would you like some brief guidance on how to manage what you're experiencing?

Multi-Day Symptom Tracking
Symptoms rated as "moderate" for 3 or more consecutive days trigger a recommendation to contact the care team.

Patient Guidance and Care Team Communication
"Review your symptom summary. For alerts, immediately contact your care team or call 911 for urgent symptoms."